## Message Acknowledgment

Doing a task can take a few seconds. You may wonder what happens if one of the
consumers starts a long task and dies with it only partly done. With our current
code, once RabbitMQ delivers message to the consumer, it immediately removes it
from memory. In this case, if you kill a worker we will lose the message it was
just processing. We'll also lose all the messages that were dispatched to this
particular worker but were not yet handled.

But we don't want to lose any tasks. If a worker dies, we'd like the task to be
delivered to another worker.

In order to make sure a message is never lost, RabbitMQ supports message
acknowledgments. An ack(nowledgement) is sent back from the consumer to tell
RabbitMQ that a particular message had been received, processed and that
RabbitMQ is free to delete it.

If a consumer dies without sending an ack, RabbitMQ will understand that a
message wasn't processed fully and will redeliver it to another consumer. That
way you can be sure that no message is lost, even if the workers occasionally
die.

There aren't any message timeouts; RabbitMQ will redeliver the message only when
the worker connection dies. It's fine even if processing a message takes a very,
very long time.

Message acknowledgments are turned on by default. In previous examples we
explicitly turned them off via the no_ack=True flag. The careful observer will
have noticed that the ``consumer`` variable assignment in ``kt-worker.lfe``
removed the ``no_ack 'true`` parameter in the ``basic.consume`` record:

```lisp
 (consumer (make-basic.consume
             queue (list_to_binary queue-name)))
```

We did this because we want to send a proper acknowledgment from the worker once
we're done with a task, as in the ``(loop ...)`` function:

```lisp
(kanin-chan:cast channel (make-basic.ack delivery_tag tag))
```

Using this code we can be sure that even if you kill a worker using CTRL+C while
it was processing a message, nothing will be lost. Soon after the worker dies
all unacknowledged messages will be redelivered.

### Forgotten acknowledgment

It's a common mistake to miss the basic_ack. It's an easy error, but the
consequences are serious. Messages will be redelivered when your client quits
(which may look like random redelivery), but RabbitMQ will eat more and more
memory as it won't be able to release any unacked messages.

In order to debug this kind of mistake you can use rabbitmqctl to print the
messages_unacknowledged field:

```bash
$ sudo rabbitmqctl list_queues name messages_ready messages_unacknowledged
Listing queues ...
hello    0       0
...done.
```
